---
layout: post
title: What is ADD?
date: 2015-08-30
permalink: /what-is-add/
---

ADD is not being able to control what you focus on. There are things that you
simply can't focus on without becoming exhausted, and things that you can't not
focus on, where even when you force yourself to stop doing them you keep
thinking about them long after, distracting you.

As far as I know there is no reliable way to control which things we hyperfocus
on, they seem to be a fundamental part of our character. If you hyperfocus on a
useful, productive and practical task or skill, ADD can be a blessing (although
you still have to survive in a system designed for people who can more-or-less
choose what they focus on at will). Otherwise, well...

I'm diagnosed with ADD. And even though sometimes it seems like everyone else is
too, no one really seems to understand it, sadly not even those who live with
it. This post documents how I've come to understand my "disability". Hopefully
it can be useful to my fellow ADD-havers, to parents and to educators and
employers.

I love video games, and I'd really love to get into them. I'm envious of my
friends who can get emotionally invested in a 300 hour RPG. But I can't focus on
them for more than half an hour or so at a time, so I only play games that are
designed to be played in short sittings. Arcadey games. I don't consider this a
bad thing, because spending time on video games isn't exactly productive, but I
wish I limited my play by my own volition, not because of some mental
limitation.

I also can't focus on studying. Unlike video games, I have strong incentive to
force myself to study, so I do. But it's exhausting to focus for long periods,
and after a couple weeks this leads to depression for me and I can't even force
myself to do things that require no focus, like a netflix binge, let alone
study. This leads to me often starting the semester off well, and then quickly
degrading in performance. And since classes have to start off slow, the time
interval during which I perform well is also the interval with the least impact
on the final grade.

I hope this doesn't sound like me just venting about how horrible my life with
ADD is. I'm trying to provide a case study of how ADD actually affects someone.
I'm actually quite well off because I hyperfocus on computers and programming,
which society values relatively highly, and is something I can build a career
around even if I never finish school. While I can't focus for long sittings on
video games, or my studies, or hobbies I want to pursue, I can spend a whole
night programming or configuring a fresh linux installation while hardly
noticing the passage of time.

I have a friend who hyperfocuses on music (performance and composition). He's
really good at it and while he won't get a cozy 9-5 office job, I'm quite
certain he'll be able to turn his passion into a career. I have another friend
who hyperfocuses on video games, and I can only hope he finds a way.

Outside of programming, the only time I experience that long-term focus flow
state in on amphetamines which force me to focus on EVERYTHING. I see kids who
refuse to take their drugs get a lot of shit from people who think they know
better. They get mocked for complaining that it changes their personality, and
people tell them that it's all for the best. It disgusts me. Stimulants don't
make someone with ADD into a "normal" person. You don't get to choose what you
focus on. Just like with hyperfocussing, you can't NOT focus on whatever is put
in front of you. If the first thing you hone in on is the paper you need to
write, great. But then you stop to go to the bathroom, and when you come back,
before returning to the paper you hone in on the pull-cord of your blinds and
bat it around like a kitten.

And you know how I said I don't notice the passage of time while hyperfocusing?
Same thing applies when mindlessly fidgetting with the blinds, or spinning coins
on the desk, or repeatedly throwing my phone into the air and catching it. This
can go on for uncomfortably long before I realize I've spent the last hour doing
absolutely nothing.

I waste my time on such things anyway, but without the drugs I can catch myself
much earlier â€” because I lose focus on time wasting just as easily as everything
else.

Even more dangerous is focusing on something productive that isn't the task at
hand. I've sat down to try to start and finish a final paper with a three days
to go, managed to get distracted by a (computer-related) project that had been
stewing in my brain for days and had just come to a head. I slipped and let
myself work on it for an hour after making decent progress on the paper, and
then spent the rest of the day working on it. And the whole night. Until the
stimulants finally wore off and felt so sick (from forgetting to eat all day)
that I had to stop. The next day I had an anxiety attack because I had
squandered a whole day (and messed up my chemistry probably), and finally the
next day I managed to squeeze out the paper, no drugs involved. It got a C-.

ADD isn't about not caring enough to perform up to expectations. It's not about
being lazy. It's not about being easily distracted, or a lack of willpower, or
only being able to focus on the things you feel like focusing on. It's about a
lack of control over your capacity to focus.

**Note:** There was an interesting discussion [on
HN](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=10144905).
